Results:

To further investigate whether the importance of Ace-1 for PM resistance could be detected in an agnostic scan, we employed an alternative approach to SNP-based GWAS, in which we used the raw sequencing reads to look for k-mers whose presence or frequency were correlated with resistance to PM. Across all 71 samples, we identified a total of 767,560,108 [could re-phrase as "we identified over 767 million"] k-mers (k = 31) that were present in at least 3 samples and absent in at least 3 samples. We first looked at whether the presence / absence of these kmers were correlated with PM resistance, and found no evidence of association for any of the k-mers, even with the false discovery rate set as high as 5%, matching the results of the GWAS. 

In contrast, when looking at k-mer frequencies instead of presence / absence, we found a strong signal of association with PM resistance in the region of the Ace-1 duplication. In total, we found 9603 significant k-mers when controlling the false discovery rate at 0.1%. These individual 31 bp k-mers were assembled into 485 sequences, with a median length of 50bp. Forty six of these sequences either did not align to the An. gambiae genome or aligned to the Y or "unknown" scaffold, and were discarded. Of the remaining 439 sequences, 414 (94%) aligned to the region of the Ace-1 duplication, while the other 25 sequences aligned in scattered regions across the rest of the genome. Furthermore, 24 of these 25 sequences showed very strong correlation of k-mer frequency with Ace-1 duplication copy number [could have a figure in Supp. Mat. showing this correlation?], indicating that these k-mers are also associated with this mutation and were mis-aligned to other regions of the genome. Only one sequence did not correlate with Ace-1 copy number, indicating that it may represent another variant involved in resistance. This sequence aligned at position 866,2022 on chromosome 2L, which is a non-coding region with no proximity to any gene of known function. Overall, therefore, the k-mer analysis showed an overwhelming concentration of phenotypic association in the Ace-1 duplication, supporting the conclusion that this mutation is the primary driver of resistance to PM in this study. 


Methods:

K-mer counts were obtained for each sample using the "count" function in jellyfish v. 2.2.10 [Marcais and Kingsford 2011] with parameters -C -m 31 --out-counter-len 2 -s 300M --bf-size 10G.

To reduce the computer memory footprint of the k-mer count tables, the k-mer strings were recoded as integers, split into separate files according to their leading nucleotides (k-mers beginning with AAA were saved into one file, those beginning with AAC into another file, and so on) and, within each file, sorted lexographically. We call the set of k-mers within each file a "lexographical group". This was done using the custom python script recode_split_sort.py (Supplementary Materials). 

The resulting tables were loaded into R, and K-mers present in fewer than 3 samples, or absent in fewer than 3 samples, were discarded in order to reduce the size of the dataset while keeping the K-mers most likely to show variation in the poulation (called "variant k-mers"). This was done separately for each lexographical group, using the script join_tables.r. Of a total of 1,734,834,987 k-mers, 967,274,879 were discarded by this filter, leaving 767,560,108 kmers for analysis.  

To test whether the presence of any k-mers was associated with PM resistance, the kmer counts were converted to a binary presence / absence variable and all lexographical groups were then combined into a single table. The sample set was further reduced by grouping together all kmers with the same presence / absence profiles, such that each profile was present only once. This was done using the script combine_all_tables.r. Significance of phenotypic association was determined independently for each marker using Fisher's exact test with false discovery rate correction, implemented in the script fisher_testing.r.

To test whether the frequencies of any k-mers were associated with PM resistance, normalised k-mer frequencies were obtained by dividing the k-mer counts by the total number of variant k-mers in each sample. Spearman's rank correlation against resistance phenotype were then run independently on all 767,560,108 k-mers, with false discovery rate control at 0.1%. This was done using the scripts get_total_kmers_per_sample.r and full_phen_assoc_standalone.r.

Because multiple k-mers can overlap a single mutation, it was likely that many of the k-mers identified as significant were overlapping. We therefore took the k-mers that showed a significant association with PM resistance and assembled them by joining any k-mers that overlapped perfectly over at least 10 bp. This was implemented using the script assemble_full_sig_kmers.py. The resulting assembled k-mers were aligned against the AgamP3 reference genome using bwa mem. Results were then prepared into tables for plotting with the scripts investigate_full_sig_kmers.py and full_sig_kmers_for_plotting.r.

[Package used (incorporate as you see fit): FDR was done using fdrtool package in R. ]

Guillaume Marcais and Carl Kingsford, A fast, lock-free approach for efficient parallel counting of occurrences of k-mers. Bioinformatics (2011) 27(6): 764-770 (first published online January 7, 2011) doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btr011




# INÚTL
To test whether the presence of any k-mers was associated with pirimiphos-methyl resistance, k-mer counts were converted to a binary presence/absence variable. The sample set was further reduced by grouping together all k-mers with the same presence/absence profiles in all samples, such that each profile was present only once. Significance of phenotypic association was determined independently for each marker using Fisher’s exact test with false discovery rate correction (ɑ = 0.05).
